


streszczenie dokumentu w formie konkretnych zaleceń i komend dla llama.cpp, pozwalających uruchomić model 35B (np. Qwen 2.5 MoE) na
  karcie graficznej z 6GB VRAM (np. GTX 1060):

  1. Kluczowe Flagi (Zalecenia)

   * --n-cpu-moe [liczba] – Najważniejsza flaga. Przenosi "ekspertów" modelu na CPU.
       * Wartość 41: Wszyscy eksperci na CPU (bezpieczne, wolniejsze).
       * Wartość 35: Część ekspertów na GPU (szybsze, zajmuje więcej VRAM).
   * --no-mmap – Ładuje cały model do RAM-u na starcie. Zapobiega doczytywaniu z dysku podczas rozmowy, co eliminuje "stuttering" (zacięcia).
   * --mlock – Blokuje model w pamięci RAM. Zapobiega "wypychaniu" danych przez system operacyjny do pliku wymiany (swap), co zapewnia stałą
     prędkość po wielu godzinach pracy.
   * Kwantyzacja KV Cache (Turbo Quant) – Pozwala na ogromny kontekst (nawet 256k tokenów) przy małym VRAM:
       * --cache-type-k turbo4 (klucze)
       * --cache-type-v turbo3 (wartości)

  2. Przykładowa konfiguracja (6GB VRAM)

  Jeśli chcesz uzyskać ok. 17 tokenów/s na starym sprzęcie, użyj tych parametrów:

   1 llama-cli \
   2   -m model_qwen_35b.gguf \
   3   --n-cpu-moe 36 \
   4   --no-mmap \
   5   --mlock \
   6   --cache-type-k turbo4 \
   7   --cache-type-v turbo3 \
   8   -c 256000

  3. Dlaczego to działa? (Zasady)

   1. Inteligentny podział: Zamiast dzielić model na pół (GPU/CPU), zostawiamy lekkie, często używane części na GPU, a ciężkie, rzadziej
      używane "bloki ekspertów" (MoE) wyrzucamy do pamięci RAM.
   2. Pamięć RAM: Musisz mieć wystarczająco dużo zwykłego RAM-u (w przewodniku użyto 24GB DDR4), aby pomieścić model (ok. 20GB).
   3. Unikaj Speculative Decoding: Autor ostrzega, że przy modelach typu MoE i SSM (jak Qwen), "zgadywanie" kolejnych słów przez mniejszy
      model drastycznie spowalnia system zamiast go przyspieszać.

  4. Wymagania systemowe (Docker/LXC)
  Jeśli uruchamiasz to w kontenerze, pamiętaj o:
   * Przyznaniu uprawnień do blokowania pamięci (IPC_LOCK).
   * Ustawieniu limitów ulimit memlock na nielimitowane, aby flaga --mlock zadziałała.

  Podsumowanie efektów: Model 35B, 6GB VRAM, 256k kontekstu, prędkość 17 tokenów/sekundę (szybciej niż czytanie na głos).







Can you run a 35-billion-parameter


AI on an 8-year-old GPU with only 6 gigs


of VRAM at acceptable speed? Yes, you


can. We are going to explore every way


to not just run this model, but run it


fast enough that it doesn't feel like


you're talking through a satellite


phone. And we're going to run it on the


full context and making it usable, not


just possible. Five tricks, one Docker


command, let's get into it. Before we


touch any flags, let me introduce the


three characters in this story. First,


llama.cpp,


the engine. I'm using llama.cpp because


it gives you crazy flexibility. Every


knob exposed, every memory decision


yours to make. If you want to


micromanage where each piece of the


model lives, and we will, this is the


tool.


Second character, Qwen 3.6 35B A3B, the


model. Total size, 35 billion


parameters, but it's a mixture of


experts, so only 3 billion are active


for any given word. 256 tiny


specialists. Eight of them wake up per


token. Hold that thought, we'll come


back to it. Third character, the


worst-case rig I had on hand, built


almost 8 years ago. Specifically,


8-year-old GTX 1060 with 6 gigs of VRAM


on PCIe Gen 3. 8-year-old i3 8100, four


cores, no hyperthreading. 24 gigs of


DDR4. Nothing on this list would impress


anyone in 2026. If your setup is better


than this, and it almost certainly is,


your numbers will come out better than


mine. The point is that this rig is a


floor, not a ceiling. Cast introduced.


Let's start with a dumb thing first, the


way most people would actually try it,


the obvious move. Split the model in


half. Top half on the GPU, bottom half


on the CPU and RAM. Do as much as fits,


push the rest off board. That's what


dash NGL does. Number of GPU layers. We


tell it 20, meaning the first 20 layers


go on the card, the rest stay on the


CPU. It loads, just barely, and the


model starts answering at about three


tokens a second, which means watching a


sentence appear over 20-30 seconds.


We're in satellite phone territory. Why


is it crawling? Because every layer


carries its experts with it. When a


layer is on the CPU, the entire layer,


including its expert blocks, lives on


the CPU. And per token, the data has to


make the trip across PCIe. The bus


chokes. Three tokens a second, useless


for anything real time. So, this is our


floor, the dumb baseline. Now, the


question becomes, what do we know about


this model that the dumb baseline


doesn't? And this is where the type of


model we are running starts to matter.


Most older AI models are what they


called dense.


Every neuron in every layer fires for


every word.


If a dense model has 35 billion


parameters,


all 35 billion run.


Mixture of experts is different. The


bulk of the weights live in those expert


blocks.


Per token, the model only wakes up a


handful of them,


which means most of the model is


sleeping most of the time.


Dead weight if you're sitting on the


GPU, but cheap rent if you're sitting in


RAM.


So, the smart split isn't half the


layers each. It's keep the small,


fast-firing parts on the GPU,


push the giant sleeping experts onto the


CPU.


Per token, the GPU does its job, then


asks for whichever eight experts are


needed, then does its job again.


llama.cpp has the exact flag for this.


--n-cpu-moe


41.


Take every layer's experts and pin them


to the CPU. Everything else, send to the


GPU. Reload.


Same model, same hardware, one different


flag. Speed jumps from three tokens a


second to 10.


230% faster, no hardware change.


That'd be the end of most YouTube


videos.


Cool trick, runs at reading speed, ship


it.


But there's four more flags. Each one


makes it faster. All right, on to the


next one. Flag two, no mmap. By default,


llama.cpp does this clever thing. It


pretends the whole model file is in RAM,


but really, it's still on the disk. The


OS pages chunks in only when they're


needed. Sounds smart, it's actually slow


for what we are doing. Every few tokens,


the model asks for an expert that hasn't


been loaded yet. Disk read, wait, token


comes out late. With no mmap, llama.cpp


reads the entire model into RAM upfront,


the whole 20 gigs. Once it's there,


every expert is already loaded. No more


disk reads during inference, no more


page faults mid-token. Every lookup is


predictable. 10 tokens a second jumps to


13 and a half, about a 35% bump from one


flag. No code, no retraining, no


quantization tricks, just telling the


OS, "Hey, stop being clever about my


RAM." Two flags down, three to go. Now,


check the GPU. At 13 tokens a second, it


still isn't full. Two whole gigabytes of


VRAM just sitting there, free real


estate we can spend. So, we change one


number from 41 down to 35. That pulls


six layers worth of experts from the CPU


back onto the GPU. More work happens on


the fast chip, less crosses the PCIe


bus. VRAM goes from 4 gigs to 5 and a


half. Speed jumps from 13 and a half to


17. There's a trade-off, by the way. The


bigger the GPU's footprint, the less


room for the context window. We dropped


from 100,000 tokens of context down to


about 64,000. Fine for most chats, not


fine if you're feeding it a whole code


base. Hold that thought. 17 tokens a


second, faster than I read out loud on a


card from when Bohemian Rhapsody was in


theaters. Three flags, 17 tokens a


second. We could honestly stop here, but


I want my context back.


Real quick, if you like seeing what old


hardware can actually do, I do this


every couple weeks. New model, cheap


setup, no cloud bill. Subscribe and


you'll catch the next one. Right, back


to it. Remember that context window we


had to shrink? Time to get it back.


We're at 17 tokens a second, but context


is chopped down to 64,000 tokens. To get


more, you'd usually need more VRAM,


which we don't have. Here's why context


costs VRAM. Every token you've ever


shown the model, the model remembers.


Specifically, it stores two numbers per


token per layer, keys and values, the KV


cache, and it grows linearly. Twice the


context, twice the memory. Heads-up, I


was already using Q8 quantization on the


cache. Q8 is basically lossless,


negligible quality drop. But push past


Q8, Q4, Q3, and the answers start to


fall apart.


Earlier this year, Google DeepMind


published Turbo Quant, random rotation


then aggressive quantization. Four bits


for keys, three for values, and somehow


still almost lossless. Q3 and Q4


territory with quality you can't tell


apart from Q8. The math is in the paper


if you're into that. Two flags, turbo


four for the keys, turbo three for the


values. The asymmetry isn't a typo. This


model uses grouped query attention with


an 8:1 ratio, so the keys can take


heavier compression than the values.


Don't worry about it, just type the


flags. Okay, flags on. First, let's not


get greedy. Bump context from 64,000


back to 128,000.


Reload. It loads. 5.3 gigs of VRAM, 128K


context, no OOM. That's already a win.


Half a flag and we double the context,


but only 0.7 gigs free. Can we be


greedier? Push it to 256,000.


Reload. Out of memory. Wait, what if we


pull one more layer of experts back to


the CPU? NCPU-MOE goes from 35 to 36.


Try again. It fits, just barely. 5.9 of


6 gigs. 64,000 stretches to 256,000,


four times the entire training context


of the model, on the same 6-gig GPU.


Speed, still 17 tokens a second, same as


before. Compression doesn't slow it


down. The cache is small enough that the


lookup is essentially free. What that


gets you in practical terms? You can


paste a small book in and ask questions


about it. You can drop an entire code


base as context without the model


forgetting page one by the time it reads


page 50. Four flags, same speed, four


times the context. That's the Turbo


Quant trick. One paper, two flags, free


real estate.


One more flag and we're done. This one


isn't about speed. It's the difference


between a setup that works in a demo and


a setup that survives Tuesday. There's a


problem you don't see until you leave


the server running for a day. Check


this. Mlocked, 12 kilobytes. 12, as in


basically nothing. All those experts we


put in RAM, the kernel thinks they're


regular files. Hours later, when memory


gets tight or the system idles, it


starts paging some of them out to disk.


Next inference, page fault, stutter,


random slow tokens. The fix is annoying


because it lives in three places. The


LXC container needs permission to lock


memory. Docker needs the IPC lock


capability. llama.cpp needs the mlock


flag. Skip any one of them and it


silently falls back to default. No


error, just a slow leak. With all three


in place, you literally tell the kernel,


do not touch this RAM. Do not page it.


Do not move it. It's mine.


Recheck meminfo. mlocked 16 GB. Every


expert is glued in place. The day three


slowdown? Gone. Same 17 tokens a second,


by the way. The speed didn't change


because in a fresh boot, the experts


were already cached. What changed is


that this thing now runs for a week


without degrading. Production behavior.


Five flags. That's the whole list. 35


billion parameters, 6 gigs of VRAM,


256,000


tokens of context, 17 tokens a second.


Stable. Okay, so we're done with the


wins. Five flags, one Docker command, 17


tokens a second. Now I want to talk


about the thing I tried that didn't work


because most videos skip that part.


Speculative decoding. The idea is


beautiful. You run a tiny model


alongside the big one. The tiny one


guesses the next eight tokens. The big


one verify them in a single batch


instead of eight serial passes. When it


works, you get two to four times the


speed. I added Qwen 3.5, the 800 million


parameter version, as the drafter. Same


tokenizer as the target. 248,000 tokens.


Should plug right in. The drafter held


its own. Acceptance came in around 65%.


Two out of every three guesses landed.


Solid for an 800 million parameter


draft. And the speed dropped from 17 to


11. Slower, even with decent


predictions. That broke my brain for a


day. Here's why it doesn't work. Two


reasons. Both architectural. First,


mixture of experts. Each token in the


batch picks its own eight experts out of


256. Eight tokens batched together can


pull from 64 different experts per


layer. Each one fetched fresh from CPU


RAM over the PCIe bus. The verification


stops being a batch and turns into a


memory thrash. Second, this model uses


state space layers. 30 out of 40 layers


are SSM. SSM layers compute one position


at a time. Each step depends on the


state of the step before it. You can't


parallelize them across a draft window.


So the verify eight tokens in one pass


trick doesn't apply. The math actually


goes the wrong way. Per token


verification time stays the same when


you batch because expert loading


dominates. Plus, you paid the cost of


running the draft model. Net negative.


Someone benchmarked this on a 3090


across 19 different configurations. Same


result. Speculative decoding works for


transformers. It doesn't work for what


we are running. There's a follow-up


paper called Dflash, block diffusion


drafter. Generates eight tokens in one


shot instead of one at a time. There's a


working drafter for Qwen 3.6's 27


billion dense version. Different model,


same trick I want, finally working.


Worth coming back to. All right, let's


wrap. Here's the whole thing.


One Docker command, five flags that


matter.


35 billion parameters, 6 gigs of VRAM,


256,000


tokens of context, 17 tokens a second on


a card older than every AI startup


you've heard of.


The hardware isn't the bottleneck


anymore. The defaults are. And remember,


these numbers came off about the worst


case rig you can dig up in 2026.


Eight-year-old GPU, eight-year-old CPU,


plain DDR4. If you've got anything from


this decade, newer card, faster RAM,


PCIe Gen4, your numbers will go up. This


is the floor. What you can actually run


on the card already in your machine is


bigger than what the AI press tells you.


Most of the work is done. You just have


to know which flags to set.


There's a follow-up worth trying. Dense


27 billion model, the Dflash drafter.


See if we can crack 25 tokens a second


on the same 1060. If it works, that's a


different kind of crazy. If it doesn't,


you'll get the same honest write-up.


Honest question for the comments. What's


a real workload you'd want to run on


this setup? Codebase Q&A, long doc


summarization, some weird local agent


thing. Drop it below. I'm curious what


people would actually use this for.


That's it. See you in a couple of weeks.